# Unconference Event

The term "unconference"  conotes a more innovative format consistent with self-organizing and less formal meeting formats. These formats require much less up front planning, administration and management resources and are far simpler/easier to actually host and conduct when they happen. By using Google form driven processes to elicit proposals for sessions (whether lightning talk or demo presentations) paired with self-organizing small group discussions among the research event participants who are interested in that topic, it is possible to create a surprisingly high quality research and innovation oriented event. While less formal, the value created and experience provided can still be great due to how this particular meeting format is designed. 

## Self-Generated and Self-Organizing

The term Unconference has been used to mean many different types of meeting. The type of unconference I am describing is a version of the "Open Space" meeting model.  The fundemental essence of this type of unconference is self-organization. I first became aquainted with this creative event structure roughly [10 years ago in California](http://www.windley.com/archives/2007/05/internet_identity_workshop_2007_day_three.shtml) as a participant in the [Internet Identity Workshop](http://www.internetidentityworkshop.com). This general Unconference event format has been used in meetings of 5 to 2,100 people,  [according to Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Space_Technology#Self-organization).  The approach is characterized by a few basic mechanisms:

* a broad, open invitation which articulates the purpose of the meeting;
* participants' chairs arranged in a circle;
* a "bulletin board" of issues and opportunities posted by participants;
* a "marketplace" with many break-out spaces that participants move freely between, learning and contributing as they "shop" for information and ideas;
* a "breathing" or "pulsation" pattern of flow, between plenary and small-group breakout sessions.

The approach is most distinctive for its initial lack of an agenda, which sets the stage for the meeting's participants to create the agenda for themselves, in the first 30–90 minutes of the meeting or event. Typically, an "open space" meeting will begin with short introductions by the sponsor and usually a single facilitator. The sponsor introduces the purpose; the facilitator explains the "self-organizing" process called "open space." Then the group creates the working agenda, as individuals post their issues in bulletin board style. Each individual "convener" of a breakout session takes responsibility for naming the issue, posting it on the bulletin board, assigning it a space and time to meet, and then later showing up at that space and time, kicking off the conversation, and taking notes. These notes are usually compiled into a proceedings document that is distributed physically or electronically to all participants. Sometimes one or more additional approaches are used to sort through the notes, assign priorities, and identify what actions should be taken next. Throughout the process, the ideal facilitator is described as being "fully present and totally invisible", "holding a space" for participants to self-organize, rather than managing or directing the conversations.

## Engaging Experiences and Idea Flow

Perhaps a formal, coordinated and managed "research conference" may be more desirable or some creative blend of conference and unconference formats would be a better overall fit for the RealityVirtually Hackathon. But I'd like to invite consideration of some potential advantages of the different style of format I've suggested . I'm suggesting a variation of what is known as the "open space" unconference meeting format because I've observed the mix of structure and self-organization provides all participants the opportunity to hear many different new ideas (from the quick talks or demos) and to experience a few discussions (based on the presenters and topics of their choosing). The big group touchpoints (at the start, at lunch and at the end) along with the presentations and small group discussions is a pretty reliable way to generate lots of good experiences and catalyzing idea-flow among different combinations of people interested in the same topics. In my opinion, these are attributes of a good research session and especially appropriate to a VR/AR hackathon special session at the Media Lab. 

## Outputs and Outcomes

FWIW, there is something about this format that appears unusually efficient/effective at resulting in good event outcomes. I think this is partly because the meeting format helps to optimize matches/mixes of people+ideas+experiences and when the format is well facilitated the people generally report feeling good about their experience, what they learned, who they met, etc. There are also more tangible outputs from such research events that are of good value despite not being the result of heavy duty wrangling/editing/curating papers, presentations, discussion notes, etc. I'm suggesting a tweak on the typical process for Open Space that funnels presentation proposals through Google Forms and uses Google slides for presentations which can provide some cool new ways to collaborate and produce easy to access/collect/curate meeting outputs with low coordination costs.

## Form-Based Flow and Shared Slides

The suggestion for running the entire research session on Google forms and slides is a deliberate extension of the Open Space model for holding Unconference event.  Here is the basic idea: A unified slide deck or an event is a good idea in general but Google Slides are an uncanny good fit for this format. Assuming a ground rule is that any presenter using slides is expected to use Google Slides, then the authoritative slide deck can easily contain the final version of each presenters slides and they can even change their slides up to the last moment or while they are presenting! For presenters doing a demo, at least the splash page for their presentation is on a slide in the right order and with the right speaker/title/etc info. 

The principal of running "all" of the event through the same workflow is important.  In addition to having presenters use the same Google slide deck, the small group discussion notes are likewise entered onto "notes" slides inserted at the end of the same Google Slides deck used for the lightning talk or demo (and adding as many slides as are needed to contain the notes for that session.  The result of funnelling everything through Google forms and slides is that all the general event content (the final agenda, the intro/outro stuff, branding, thanks/attributions, etc, etc) and all the presentation/demo content (the speaker names/affiliations, presentation titles, actual slide content, links/references, bio's etc, etc) and all the breakout group/discussion content (who led the session, notes of the main comments/questions/ideas/etc, outline/snippets of code or other examples people discussed, links to relevant projects/posts/people/etc, photos of whiteboards, etc) are instantly available the moment entered onto one of the event slide decks by any presenter, participant or other invited contributor. This means that 1. this provides everything needed for a nice, complete proceedings and with a little low intensity wrangling it is suitable as on output from the event and 2. it is real-time so anybody involved with the event can see what any other small group is up to at the same time and this is cool to see for organizers, participants (who talked about what just now?) and others at the event or beyond.
